And just one chapter in the book of Obadiah,
and we'll look at just a few verses,
really as a springboard into our message this evening.
And this brief, minor prophet book of Obadiah
is addressed to Edom.
It's only got 21 verses in this short book of the Bible,
and we find that the descendants of Esau
are those that are being addressed here,
concerning Edom.
These are the descendants of Esau.
And we understand, and we won't take a lot of time
this evening to develop all of this,
but historically speaking, the Edomites
were in regular conflict with the people of Gob,
the nation of Israel.
And oftentimes, when Israel would face difficulty,
when Israel would face some level of defeat,
we would find that there are many times
in which you could see that the Edomites would rejoice
when Israel would face some of those hardships
and difficulties.
We are mindful, maybe one of the most familiar accounts
is found for us in Numbers 20, verses 14 through 22,
and I'm just going to briefly mention
that it was during that period of time
in which Moses made the request to pass through their land.
And you'll remember as you think about that portion of Scripture
that that request was denied.
And we find that God, in this particular book,
as He would use the prophet Obadiah to issue this warning,
this really just a message of doom and judgment,
we find that Edom would be judged by the Lord,
and her doom was certain.
And we see that, and really in the first few verses,
God gives us some insight here.
I want you to see in verse number one,
the Bible says,
"...the vision of Obadiah, thus saith the Lord God concerning
Edom, we have heard a rumor from the Lord,
an ambassador is sent among the heathen,
arise ye and let us rise up against her in battle.
Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen.
Thou art greatly despised."
Notice the statement that begins verse number three.
It really will be the subject in which we'll study this evening
with this thought of the danger of deception.
Notice verse three,
"...the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee.
Thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock,
whose habitation is high."
Notice this,
"...that saith in his heart,
who shall bring me down to the ground?
Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle,
and though thou set thy nest among the stars,
thence will I bring thee down,
saith the Lord."
Her judgment is announced and we find that her doom is certain,
but we notice the insight that God gives us
at the beginning of verse number three,
"...the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee."
The title for the thought, the message this evening,
"...the pride of thine heart,
the pride of thine heart."
You'll notice the deception that is listed here in verse number three,
verse number three,
"...the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee."
You'll note that they were not deceived by the enemy without.
Oftentimes, as we've studied these last several weeks
with the subject matter of the danger of deception,
we've spoken about the age of deception in which we're living.
And obviously, there have been many ages of deception
and we find that deception is nothing new
as we studied in the very first week of this series.
We understand that it was deception that was used by the enemy,
by the devil, there in the garden.
And we find that Paul mentions that Eve was deceived.
And we find that as we would think about all of the tools
in the toolbox, if you will, of Satan, our enemy, our adversary,
deception is one that he uses regularly.
And we find here, however, that Edom, the Edomites,
these descendants of Esau,
they were not deceived by some enemy without.
We've given warning of those that lie in wait,
waiting to deceive, right?
Let no man deceive you by any means.
And we've spoken about these warnings that God gives us
within His Word with regard to the danger of deception,
but here we find they were not deceived by some group of people.
They were not deceived by some enemy.
No, it was the pride of their own heart that deceived them.
It was the pride of their own heart that deceived them.
See, the reality is that pride is not only deceptive,
but pride is destructive.
Pride is destructive.
Let me say this, at some level,
each and every one of us have to deal with pride.
And if we think, I'm not prideful,
you're probably prideful in the fact that you're not prideful.
You understand what I mean?
Pride is something that can get each and every one of us.
And we find that as we think about this subject this evening of pride,
I want you to understand in the Noah Webster's 1828 Dictionary,
it says this of pride, it's inordinate self-esteem.
It's a lengthy definition,
but it's very interesting all that is mentioned in the definition here
in this 1828 Noah Webster's Dictionary.
It says that it's an unreasonable conceit of one's own superiority
in talents, in beauty, in wealth, in accomplishments,
in rank, or elevation in office.
The pride manifests itself in lofty airs,
distance, reserve, and often in contempt of others.
We think about pride and we notice the statement that is given here
in Obadiah in verse number 3,
as the announcement of judgment, the doom of Edom is made known.
He says, the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee.
Notice what it says,
Thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high,
but then notice this last part of verse number 3,
that saith in his heart,
who shall bring me down to the ground?
What are they saying?
I'm superior, no one's going to defeat me,
no one's going to bring me down.
I have this lofty idea, this inordinate self-esteem,
this conceit of our superiority,
there's no one that's going to bring us down.
In fact, if we're mindful of the enemy,
and we spoke about the tool that he often goes to in his toolbox there,
as is mentioned in Genesis 3,
that tool of deception,
we find that it was pride that was the sin
that was found within the heart of Satan, is it not?
Lucifer, he was created, but he was prideful.
You can read in the Old Testament account
that God gives us with regard to the fall of Satan,
the fall of Lucifer,
and how he said in his own heart,
I will be like the Most High.
And you think about the pride and the destruction
and the deception even there in the heart of Lucifer
with regard to that pride.
I've mentioned already that pride is deceitful
as we see here in this text of Scripture.
We find that pride is destructive.
I want to give you an Old Testament example,
then we're going to look at some truth
within the New Testament that we can apply in our lives.
Go back to 2 Chronicles 26, if you will.
2 Chronicles 26 gives us the record of King Uzziah.
Now, King Uzziah basically would be described
as being a good king.
If you were to take all of the kings of Israel,
you'd be hard-pressed after the divided kingdom,
you'd be hard-pressed to find any that were good.
In fact, all of them typically would be labeled
in the category of being a bad king.
In Judah, we would find that there were several
that you would categorize,
and some of them would be categorized
as being a good king.
Some of them were very good kings.
Some of them were basically good,
and Uzziah would fall in that category.
And we find that he was helped by the Lord.
We find that he sought the Lord.
Notice what the Bible says in verse 4 of 2 Chronicles 26,
and he, speaking of Uzziah, did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord.
Look at verse 5, and he, Uzziah,
sought God in the days of Zechariah,
who had understanding in the visions of God,
and as long as he sought the Lord,
God made him to prosper.
Oh, there's a very vital principle
in that verse of Scripture,
the importance of seeking God
and having God's favor in our lives.
Notice in verse 7, the Bible says,
and God helped him.
Aren't you thankful that God is the helper?
He is my helper, and He helped him.
Notice the Bible says in verse 8,
for he strengthened himself exceedingly.
Moreover, Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem
at the corner gate and at the valley gate
and at the turning of the wall and fortified them.
God was blessing and God was helping Uzziah.
We find that at the end of verse 15,
the Bible says, for he was marvelously helped.
Notice those last four words.
Till he was strong.
Oh, this is a turning point in the life of Uzziah,
unfortunately.
We find that in this particular time,
we find that he failed to recognize
that though they had great advancements,
though they had experienced great deliverance,
and though God had blessed them exceedingly,
the Bible says,
that He was marvelously helped till He was strong.
And then it says this in v. 16,
but when He was strong, what happens?
His heart was lifted up to His destruction.
I do not think it would be much of a stretch
to say that that phrase,
His heart was lifted up,
could be synonymous with being prideful.
Amen?
His heart was lifted up,
and the Bible says, to His destruction.
For He transgressed against the Lord his God.
He went into the temple of the Lord
to burn incense upon the altar of incense.
Now, as a king,
He was not permitted to engage in this activity.
This was reserved for the priests.
This was not something that the king
was privileged to do,
to enter into the temple and to offer incense.
And we find that He did, however, why?
Because He was strong.
Because His heart was lifted up,
and it was lifted up to His destruction.
And the Bible tells us that Uzziah,
that he became a leper.
He became a leper.
God judged him.
We find that there were some men
that withstood him,
and according to v. 17,
it says that they were valiant men
and they withstood Uzziah the king.
And basically, they tell him
it's not for him to do what he's doing.
It's not to engage in this activity.
This is not the service that the king
is to engage in.
And we find that he's wroth with them
in v. 19,
and had a censer in his hand to burn incense.
And while he was wroth with the priest,
the leprosy even rose up in his forehead
before the priest in the house of the Lord
from beside the incense altar.
He was leprous in the middle of v. 20,
in his forehead,
and they thrust him out from thence.
Uzziah himself hasted also to go out
because the Lord had smitten him.
Nebuchadnezzar learned something
about the ability that God has
to abase or to humble someone.
Remember, Nebuchadnezzar's the great king of Babylon.
And he of course,
as he would stand there before Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego,
as they would defy the order
to bow down to that image
that had been created,
who is that God that shall deliver thee?
Remember, in the book of Daniel,
and we find that shortly thereafter,
that Nebuchadnezzar finds out who God is,
and we find that though he continues
in his pride and he understands,
listen, he was powerful.
But he's not all powerful.
And after God sent him out for a season
to live like a wild animal
and to grow as an animal
and to live and behave as an animal,
he acknowledged that God is able to humble.
God is able to abase.
And we find that pride is deceitful.
It causes people...
Look, you think about Uzziah here.
He had been helped and God had blessed
and he had trusted and depended
and sought the Lord,
but when his heart is filled up,
when he's strong,
his heart was lifted up with pride
and it was lifted up to his destruction.
Notice in the New Testament, if you will,
look at 1 Corinthians 10.
We'll look at a couple of verses
here in the New Testament.
1 Corinthians 10 will be the first example
that we look at.
You notice that in this particular passage of Scripture,
Paul, as he's speaking to the believers in Corinth,
he begins with giving them a number of examples
from Old Testament biblical record
of the children of Israel
and the ways in which God was not pleased with them.
In fact, it says in verse number five
of 1 Corinthians 10,
but with many of them, God was not well pleased
for they were overthrown in the wilderness.
And then he gives examples.
There are five examples that are given
in the next several verses
of the events in which God was not pleased
with the behavior of these people.
We find that he says this in verse number 11.
Now, all these things happened unto them
for in samples and they are written
for our admonition
upon whom the ends of the world are come.
And so we find that we're given the truth
in the book of Romans
that the things that were written aforetime
are written for our learning.
Here we find that he says
that they're written for our admonition.
And notice what he says in verse number 12.
Wherefore, let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall.
Let him that thinketh that he standeth
What was the deal with Edom, with the Edomites?
They thought that they were in a place
in which they were superior,
that they could not be taken down,
but they failed to recognize the omnipotent God
and they failed to recognize the judgment
that would come from God.
They were deceived.
The pride of their heart had deceived them.
And we find that here, the word of God tells us
that we need to, that he that thinketh that he standeth,
we need to take heed lest he fall.
It's interesting how many times you find
the phrase take heed coupled in a verse of scripture
that deals with the subject of deception.
And you find that here,
the word deception is not listed in verse number 12,
but no doubt as we think about the context
and the instruction that is being provided,
let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall.
Listen, there's not one of us that in our own power
are any match for Satan, in our own power.
We can't, what did Paul say in Ephesians six?
We wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against spiritual wickedness in high places.
That's why we're instructed to be strong in the Lord
and the power of his might.
That's why we're instructed to put on the whole armor of God
because in of ourselves, for me or for you,
none of us have the ability to go toe-to-toe with Satan
and be victorious.
But thanks be to God which giveth us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Oh, you think about Paul when he speaks about his own life,
and he says that he knows that in him that is in his flesh,
well, if no good thing, he cries out
after he goes through the discourse
of the things that he would, he does not,
the things that he would not, that he does.
He says, oh, wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
And he says, I thank God, what, that Christ Jesus,
he is the one that enables us to be victorious.
And we understand here in the text of Scripture
that we ought not go through life thinking
that we can withstand the enemy
in our own power and own strength.
Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed, lest he fall.
How many times someone has deceived themselves
into thinking that they can go and they can,
we mentioned this from 1 Corinthians a couple of weeks ago
when we looked at the subject matter,
I guess it wasn't last week, it was the week before,
we spoke of spiritual distancing in 1 Corinthians 15, 33,
that evil communications corrupt good manners.
And the reality is that there are times in which people,
in fact, the people of God, oh, I can be in this place
or I can do this thing and it's not gonna affect me.
Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed, lest he fall.
What a great warning.
Galatians chapter number six, turn over, if you will,
several pages and look at the truth
that God gives us here in Galatians six.
Last week, we spent time in Galatians six,
verses seven and eight, dealing with the subject
of sowing and reaping with regard to deception.
But what we find in verse number three,
notice this, how Galatians six, three couples
with 1 Corinthians 10, 12,
and really Obadiah, verse number three,
we find here in Galatians six and verse number three,
look what it says,
for if a man think himself to be something
when he is nothing, what does it say?
He deceiveth himself.
Oftentimes, I've said over the years
as we speak about the subject of deception
in various contexts that we can be deceived by others,
but really the most dangerous deception is self-deception.
When we've deceived ourselves
and the thinking we're something that we're not.
And here we find that the truth of all
that has been given in the book of Galatians
with regard to walking with God and living for God
and being crucified and crucifying our flesh,
the old man and walking in the spirit
so that we would not fulfill the lust of the flesh.
And then we come to this sixth chapter
and we find that he says,
if a man think himself to be something
when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.
You know, I believe this evening
that the child of God that understands his inability
to engage in battle with Satan in his own power
and relies fully on the power of God
and puts on the whole armor of God,
I do not think that the enemy really has any desire
to engage in conflict or battle with that Christian.
You know who he loves to do battle with?
The Christian that thinks he can handle it himself.
The Christian that thinks I can, I got this,
I can handle this.
Why?
Because he's gonna be so much more.
but when we go in the power of God and the power of the Holy Spirit when we
recognize that that we're nothing I'm thankful that I'm a child of God that
I've been saved by the blood of Christ and I'm adopted in the family of God but
I recognize that my flesh man I I can't do battle with Satan I I don't want to
deceive myself it's interesting in the book of Jude you don't need to turn over
there but it's interesting that Michael the archangel in Jude verse number 9 it
says yet Michael the archangel when contending with the devil he disputed
about the body of Moses durst not bring against him a railing accusation but
said the Lord rebuke thee that's Michael the archangel having this this dispute
with with the devil and he did not bring against him a railing accusation but
simply said the Lord rebuke thee oh what great lesson for us from that example in
the book of Jude I want you to think of the Church of the Laodiceans turn to the
book of Revelation if you will and this will be the last example that we look at
of the destruction and the deception of pride and then I'm going to give you
some verses with regard to the remedy how is it that we can ensure that we do
not become deceived by the pride of our own heart we'll look at some verses here
in just a moment but look in Revelation 3 we look at the Church of the Laodiceans
it's very interesting if you couple this verse with where we started in the book
of Obadiah and I mentioned as we look there at the at the book of Obadiah in
that third verse how that they said this they said who shall excuse me in his
heart who shall bring me down to the ground notice what is said in Revelation
3 because thou sayest who says this is the Church of the Laodiceans correct
contextually you understand the the letter to the Church of the Laodiceans
begins in verse number 14 and God is speaking to the church and it says
because thou sayest the Church of the Laodiceans the the members of that
church because you say I am rich and increased with goods and have need of
nothing that's what they say that's their perspective but notice what the
verse says and knowest not they were deceived weren't they God says here's
what you say but here's what you don't know what you don't know is that you are
wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked is there not a great
contrast between what God says they are and what they think they are what do
they say oh we're increased with goods we have need of nothing we're rich
that's what you say but what you don't know is that you are wretched and
miserable and poor and blind and naked who's right God or man who's right God
is always right correct so we can say whatever we want to say Church of the
Laodiceans can say whatever they want to say but God says I'm gonna set the
record straight here's what you say here's your testimony here's what you
have have identified as is who you are and what you are you're you're rich
you're increased with good you have need of nothing but here's what I say
their heart their pride the pride of their heart hath deceived them if you
read the devotional book that we gave out in the beginning of the year and I
hope you do I hope it's a blessing to in your family just a couple of days ago I
don't remember exactly which day it was but just a couple of days ago there was
an example of a lawyer that was setting up his office anyone remember reading
that just a couple of days ago right and that lawyer was setting up his office he
was just a young lawyer and man he is setting up his office and he wanted
everyone to know how and how good his practice was going already and
everything going and he heard the door open and so he he kind of got behind his
desk and he picked up the phone and he's talking like he's talking to a client oh
yeah yeah we can do that well my schedule is kind of busy and but this
time on this day yeah that'll work yes and then the fellow that opened the door
comes around the corner and he kind of acts like you know hold on a minute and
he kind of puts the phone and says can I help you and the guy says I'm with the
phone company I'm here to set up your phone service that's pretty good pride
listen the Edomites it was the pride of their own heart that deceived them
Uzziah what happened what was the destruction why was the destruction he
had been marvelously helped but then he's strong see before he was strong he
recognized he needed God but then he's strong after God marvelously helped him
and then his heart is lifted up to his own destruction he says I know I'm the
king but I think I'm gonna I'm gonna do the service of the priest Uzziah you're
not permitted to do that but he does New Testament let him that thinketh he stand
take heed lest he fall he that thinketh he is something when he's nothing he
deceiveth himself Church of the Laodiceans we are this this is what we
say in God says but here's what you don't know this is really what you are
so what's the remedy how do we prevent the pride of our own heart deceiving us
because if we'd be honest this evening there are we deal with pride let me give
you some verses of Scripture 1st Corinthians 1 we got to go quickly 1st
Corinthians 1 and we're gonna look at just a few verses I won't make a whole
lot of comment they explain themselves well but notice in 1st Corinthians 1 in
verse 27 but God has chosen the fullest things of the world to confound the
wise God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which
are mighty base things of the world and things which are despised have God
chosen yay and things which are not to bring to not things that are why that no
flesh should glory in his presence verse 31 that according as it is written he
that glorieth what does it say let him glory in the Lord look at 1st Corinthians
chapter number four let me ask you this as you're turning there did the church
and Corinth that they have issues with pride yeah they did that was one of the
reasons for all their separation and all their problems one of the things that
they were you know what they were so prideful over their spiritual gifts can
I tell you a secret about spiritual gifts you don't sign up for it the Holy
Spirit of God gives it to you as he will for his glory that's what the Bible
teaches us and so these guys are all prideful and they're all prideful about
the fact that they have these spiritual gifts and my spiritual gift is better
than your spiritual gift they're prideful over the people that they
associated with I'm a Paul I'm of Cephas all right and we find here that
that notice what is said in 1st Corinthians 4 verse number 6 and these
things brethren I have in a figure transferred to to myself and to Apollos
for your sakes that you might learn in us what is it that they need to learn
not to think of men above that which is written that no one of you be puffed up
for one against another is that not dealing with pride absolutely that's
exactly the context and what he's dealing with he says I'm writing these
things to you that you might learn in us through our example not to think of men
above that which is written that no one of you be puffed up for one against
another now notice verse number 7 it's so just basic but it's so impactful for
us to understand the remedy of being deceived by the pride of our own heart
notice what Paul says in verse number 7 for who maketh thee to differ from
another notice this and what hast thou that thou didst not receive now if thou
didst receive it why dost thou glory as if thou hath not received it I mean we
we kind of sometimes in our culture we get wrapped up into this I'm a self-made
man kind of an attitude can I tell you what Paul said we won't take time to
look there but in first Corinthians 15 he says I am what I am by the grace of
God listen I understand there are times we say but I have this great mind who
gave you the mind that you have in just a moment God could make you not be able
to think straight right you say but I have this talent I have this ability I
have this no no you better give God glory you better stop thinking that it's
all about you you better not be deceived by the pride of your own heart and so
the questions that are asked in verse number 7 are so impactful and they're so
helpful for us that we recognize as we would think really I believe that the
questions that are posed in verse number 7 they are what I would refer to
as
probing questions.
What do you have that you did not receive?
And if you just keep tracing it back,
you have to recognize as a child of God
that it was God that blessed you with it.
In the book of Deuteronomy,
you know what God says to His people?
It's God that gives them the ability to get wealth.
You couldn't go to work tomorrow
if God didn't let you wake up.
Am I right?
Whose air are you breathing?
God's air, right?
And we find, listen, everything that we have
is because of the grace of God.
Everything that we have and everything that we are.
Now, if we recognize that it's because of the grace of God,
it's a result of the grace of God,
where is room for pride?
It's really gone, is it not?
There's no room for pride when I have that proper perspective.
Notice, and we'll just look at this last verse,
Galatians 6.14,
if I'm going to glory, I'm going to glory in Christ.
But notice in 1 Peter 5.
In 1 Peter 5, James 4 and verse 6
is a great verse of Scripture dealing with humility as well.
But I want to close quickly here
with 1 Peter 5, verses 5 and 6.
Notice what Peter says.
He says this in verse 5,
Likewise, you younger, submit yourselves unto the elder,
yea, all of you be subject one to another.
Notice what he says,
Be clothed with what?
With humility.
Be clothed with humility.
Why?
For God resisteth the proud,
and giveth grace to the humble.
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God,
that He may exalt you in due time.
Oftentimes, as I've read verse 6,
I've said in my heart, I'll say it now out loud,
that if you don't humble yourself,
God is able to humble you.
And let me say it this way as well,
it's a whole lot better for us to humble ourselves
than for God to have to humble us.
Amen?
And as we look at the verses of Scripture,
listen, as we look at 1 Corinthians
and we answer the question,
what do we have that we did not receive?
If that's not enough for us to recognize
that as we answer those questions
that there's no room for pride,
then when we come to a verse of Scripture
like 1 Peter 5 and verse number 5
and James 4 and verse 6 says the same thing,
when we see that the Bible tells us
that God resisteth the proud,
when we find in the book of Proverbs
that God hates pride,
where is there room for pride?
We say, man, I don't wanna be deceived.
I don't want the pride of my own heart to deceive me.
We find that it was the pride of their own heart
that deceived the Edomites.
Who's gonna bring us down?
God said, I'm gonna bring you down.
Their destruction was certain.
Their doom was known.
As New Testament believers,
I trust that God would help us.
There's the danger of being deceived
by those that lie in wait,
and there are many.
There are many deceivers.
But oh, that God would help us to guard
against self-deception,
that the pride of our own heart would not deceive us.
We say, how do I deal with pride?
Recognize all that I am and all that I have
is because of God,
because of His grace,
because of His amazing, abundant grace.
I am what I am by the grace of God.
I say, God resists the pride.
I don't want God to resist me.
I want God's favor.
I want God's help.
I don't want God resisting me.
He giveth more grace to the humble, amen?
And so the remedy is there.
Oh, that God would help us to prevent
in our own lives of this danger
of the pride of our heart deceiving us.
Father, we love You.
We thank You for loving us.
We thank You for Your Word,
the truth contained therein.
I pray that You'd help us tonight, Lord,
with this subject matter,
the age of deception in which we're living,
the danger of deception.
Would You help us to take heed to Thy Word?
Help us, Lord, to focus upon those verses
of remedy for pride.
Bless our time of prayer.
We thank You for the privilege,
which in Christ's name we pray, amen.
Does anyone need a prayer bulletin?
You didn't get one when you came in this evening?
You need one?